Your organization and classification (or OC)
responsibilities have an impact on
every other HR discipline and may also
have cost implications.
It is therefore important to understand
how organization and classification work,
both independently and together.
Job and position management are common
responsibilities in this area of HR.
They are associated with the
Financial Administration Act,
the Canadian Human Rights Act,
and several HR policies.
We will look at all of these in this course.
In this section, you will learn to
explain the connection between
organization and classification;
recall the manager’s responsibilities
regarding organizational design;
define the role of specific legislation
and policies in OC authorities;
match organization and classification
responsibilities to their appropriate
management level; and recall the roles of
organization and classification in HR management.
This section should take you
approximately 20 minutes to complete.
What is Organization and Classification?
In the core public administration,
“organization” refers to the alignment
of a group’s activities with the roles and
responsibilities mandated by Parliament
and the government’s priorities.
It is achieved through a process of review,
research and modelling that is called
“organizational design.”
“Classification” is the process of determining
the relative value of work at
each occupational group and level.
It is the basis for the compensation
of all public service employees.
Positions are classified by analyzing
the organizational context, job evaluation
standard, and relativity of a job description, in
accordance with Treasury Board policy instruments.
Classification underpins coherent organizational
structures and work relationships.
It also forms the framework for effective resourcing,
labour relations, training, performance
management, and effective management,
planning and use of human resources
within an organization.
Organization and classification
decisions go hand in hand.
The structure of the organization is designed
with the assistance of an HR advisor,
who also helps define the duties
to be performed in achieving the mandate.
Based on the duties of a position
(or job), the HR advisor or classification
evaluation committee determines the group
and level of the positions within an
organization’s structure.
Rates of pay are then matched
to each occupational group and level,
and employees are paid based
on the group and level of the position they occupy.
Pay and benefits are negotiated outside
of classification through the
collective bargaining process.
As previously mentioned,
organizational design is a formal process for
developing an organizational structure
based on its mandate, business objectives,
budget, resources, etc.
There are different types of organizational
structures; in the core public administration,
most are hierarchical.
Hierarchical structures can be organized
according to different models:
centralized versus decentralized;
functional versus program oriented.
In consultation with an HR advisor, you will design
an optimal structure such as the ones shown here.
Eventually, each box will be assigned
a group and level and will reflect
the name of the incumbent.
In the creation and maintenance
of an organizational structure, accountabilities,
roles and responsibilities are discussed,
defined and reflected.
The work associated with each role is then
defined in a written job description
and classified accordingly.
Consult with your OC-accredited HR advisor
to confirm your organizational structure
and to plan the review or creation of positions
to meet your operational needs.
Managers at all levels have
organization and classification
responsibilities for their organizational structures.
As outlined in the Policy on People Management,
deputy heads are responsible for determining
the department’s organizational structure
and executive resourcing requirements.
Managers are responsible for ensuring
their organizational structure is in line
with the organization’s mandate
and business objectives and determining
the work assigned to a position
and described in the job description.
An OC-accredited HR advisor uses
the organizational structure and
the job descriptions approved by the
delegated manager to evaluate and
render a classification decision
on the occupational group, subgroup
if applicable, and level to a position.
The classification of the position will
link the rate of pay as well as benefits
information, enabling the hiring manager
to ensure that sufficient funds
are available to staff the position.
Depending on your Departmental Human Resources
Delegation Instrument, you may also have
the authority to approve organizational
structures and job description content,
including effective dates.
It is important that you and your HR
advisors make organization and classification
decisions that are relevant to your areas
of responsibility, in accordance with
the Policy on People Management
and its related instruments.
The FAA identifies the Treasury Board
as the employer and authorizes deputy heads
to make classification decisions or to sub-delegate
authority under sections 6 and 11.
The specific requirement pertaining
to organization and classification
is detailed in various policy instruments.
The Policy on People Management provides
deputy heads with the parameters
to manage their classification authorities
within their areas of jurisdiction.
This policy authorizes deputy heads
to delegate classification authority
only to persons who are accredited
in organization design and classification.
Note that the authority to decide
and respond to classification grievances
remains with the deputy head.
The Canadian Human Rights Act protects
people in Canada from discrimination
when they are employed by or receive
services from the federal government.
The elements included in the
job description are aligned with section 11(2),
which states that there is a requirement
for employees under federal jurisdiction
to consider skill, effort, responsibility
and working conditions in assessing
the value of work performed.
The Treasury Board of Canada Secretariat
is responsible for all terms and conditions
of employment, collective bargaining negotiations,
collective agreements and rates of pay
within the core public administration.
For more information, consult the
Directive on Terms and Conditions of Employment
and the Directive on Classification,
which can also be found in the toolbox.
As mentioned, most organizations have
an HR delegation instrument that indicates
to whom organization and classification
authorities and responsibilities are sub-delegated.
Some key delegated responsibilities
include approving organizational structures,
job descriptions, effective dates, classification
actions or requests, as well as
rendering classification decisions.
To get a better understanding of the
role of organization and classification
within HR management, picture a seven-level
pyramid representing the sequence
in which the organization operates.
The organization needs a mandate and a budget.
Mandates are found in the acts,
regulations and charters governing the organization.
A budget forecast is used to construct
a model of how the organization might perform
financially if certain strategies, events
and plans are carried out to meet the mandates.
Duties and responsibilities are divided among
the positions within an organizational structure.
An organizational chart reveals
the structure as well as the roles,
responsibilities and relationships
between positions within the organization.
Managers should consult an experienced
HR advisor to receive valuable advice
on possible design options and their
impact on the classification of positions.
All data relevant to a position is collected.
Normally, the collection
and organization of information is the
manager’s responsibility, but it is
always necessary to consult an
HR advisor for a job analysis.
The end result of the analysis
is a job description that
aligns with the mandate of your organization.
Jobs are evaluated to determine their
relative value in relation to other positions.
This function is performed by an
accredited HR advisor or by
a classification evaluation committee.
Salary and benefits (including pensions) are
determined for particular groups of positions.
Once the group, subgroups
(if applicable), and level are
determined for a position, they are
linked to the terms and conditions
associated with that occupational group.
With the assistance of an HR advisor
you can staff vacant positions by first
establishing the relevant merit and
asset criteria required for
the successful performance of the work.
Managers at all levels set performance
and learning objectives that are
reviewed semi-annually with employees.
Making the link between organization
and classification and other
HR disciplines will guide you in
creating or classifying a position
in line with the organization’s mandate so
that you can deliver your product or service;
planning positions according to the
organization’s future needs so you
can help meet the organization’s
objectives (and mandate);
validating the job description before
staffing a position to ensure
the current classification decision
is still applicable for each position;
ensuring that job descriptions are
accurate and up to date,
thus helping avoid grievances;
appropriately identifying the official
languages requirements of a position to
ensure that the employee can deliver
the product or service effectively; and
ensuring that a classification decision
is rendered for new and revised
job descriptions before hiring is done.
Take what you have learned into real life!
Your organization will have
its own ways of doing things.
To supplement the knowledge required
to perform your organization and classification
functions, be sure to complete the course
Introduction to Organization and
Classification (P930).
This mandatory course is the first
step in the training and accreditation
of public servants working
and specializing in classification.
Test your knowledge by answering
the following questions.
Select "submit" when you are done.